URL: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis
Title: Psychosis | Lifeline
Publisher: Lifeline Australia
Retrieved: 2026-08-30
Topic: Mental Health And Cognition
Extraction: detailed HTML with headings, lists, table rows, and links
Crawl depth: 2

Psychosis | Lifeline Skip to main content

If life is in danger, call Triple Zero (000)

Call us ● Chat with us ● Text us ●

- Get help

- Help starts here

- I’m thinking about suicide

- I want to talk to someone

- I'm worried about someone

- I want to explore my options

- Get help home

Call us 13 11 14

● Service online

Chat to us Support 24/7

Text us 0477 13 11 14

Services

- Crisis support

- Counselling

- Service Finder

- Workplace & community training

- Services home

Chat with us Support 24/7

Support Toolkit

- Topics

- Techniques & guides

- Tools & apps

- Safety planning

- Community perspectives

- Fact sheets

- Support Toolkit home

Sleep and mental health

Journaling your thoughts and feelings

How to do a digital detox

Helping friends and family

About Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT)

Hear from others

- Forums

- Real stories

- Hear from others home

Listen to Joe's story

- Get involved

- Donate

- Donate to Lifeline

- Donate in memory

- Leave a gift in your Will

Fundraise

- Fundraise for Lifeline

- Events

Volunteer

- Become a crisis supporter

- Community volunteering

Partner with us

Become a Crisis Supporter Explore

- About

- About us

- Who we are

- Our strategy

- Our services

- Our impact

- Our structure

- Governance

- Lived experience framework

Our research

- Data & statistics

- Research & reports

Our partners

- Government supporters

- Corporate partners

Contact us Lifeline locations News & media Careers Shop merchandise

Volunteer Fundraise

Donate

Search

Get help

Contact us

Lifeline locations

News & media

Careers

Shop merchandise

Donate Volunteer

Urgent Crisis Support

## What can we help you find?

Close

# Get Help

If life is in danger, call 000.

Call us

Chat with us

Text us

Explore our services

Translation notice: Lifeline Crisis Support is delivered in English. This page was translated automatically and may not be fully accurate. Spot an issue? Let us know

Share feedback about automatic translation accuracy.

Breadcrumb

Back to Topics

- Home

- Support Toolkit

- Psychosis

Translate

- English

- Mandarin 普通话

- Cantonese (廣東話)

- Arabic (عربى)

- Vietnamese

- Punjabi

- Hindi

- Greek

- Italian

- Spanish

- Nepali

# Psychosis

What is psychosis?

Jump to

What is psychosis? Feelings & effects Types Causes Myths & misconceptions Short-term help Long-term help Tools & apps Support services For friends & family

## What is psychosis?

Open

### Understanding psychosis

If you experience psychosis, you may find it hard to separate what is real and what is not. This might result in you seeing, hearing, or believing things that other people don’t.

Experiencing psychosis can feel really overwhelming. You're not alone if you’re feeling confused and emotional. It’s important to remember that it's not your fault. Psychosis is a symptom of a complex mental health condition, much like seizures are a symptom of conditions like epilepsy.

Watch this video to learn more about psychosis through Lucy's experience with psychosis and her journey to recovery.

You might have heard various terms related to psychosis.

Let's break them down:

- Psychosis: A state where you find it difficult to know what's real or imagined. This can involve hearing voices or having strong beliefs that others don't share.

- Psychotic thoughts: Thoughts that are a part of experiencing psychosis. For example, you might believe you have special abilities or you're being watched, even if it's not the case.

- Psychotic illness: A longer-term medical condition where not being able to tell what's real affects your daily life. Schizophrenia is one kind of psychotic illness, and it usually needs long-term treatment.

Around 1 in every 200 adults in Australia will experience a psychotic illness each year.

Talking about your experience is important because it can be the first step to accessing the support and understanding you deserve. Reaching out to trusted friends, family, or professionals can be a vital step in managing these thoughts and finding ways to cope with them.

Remember, you're not alone in this. There are a number of ways to manage what you’re experiencing in the moment and long term , as well as support services here to help.

- Click here to save or print our psychosis fact sheet .

- Click here to save or print 13YARN's psychotic illness fact sheet for mob .

Close section

## Feelings & effects

### What does psychosis feels like and how it can affect me?

If you're noticing signs of psychosis, like shifts in your thinking or some unusual beliefs, it's understandable to feel uneasy or anxious . Feeling disconnected from what's happening around you can be isolating and scary.

It can also be hard to figure out the different ways your psychosis is affecting you when life may already feel complicated. If you've been dealing with symptoms of psychosis, whether they're new or you've had them for a while, this page is here to offer some clarity.

The below signs may help you identify what’s happening:

#### Early warning signs

- You might find that your thoughts are jumbled or confused. You may start perceiving things differently, such as seeing or hearing things that others don't

- You might develop strong beliefs that seem odd to others or aren't based on reality. For example, you might believe you have special powers or that there are hidden messages just for you.

- You may notice shifts in your emotions, such as feeling flat or overly intense. Your behaviour might become unpredictable or unusual to others, which they may point out to you.

- You could struggle to keep up with everyday tasks, like going to work or school, maintaining personal hygiene, or keeping up with social commitments.

- Your perceptions of the world around you may become distorted.

- You may find it hard to put your thoughts into words, speak in a way that's hard for others to understand, or have trouble following conversations.

Each person's journey is different, so if some points don't quite fit your experience, that's okay. Below, you can find a range of other physical, social, emotional and psychological effects of psychosis that may help you in understanding your own unique situation:

### Thoughts and feelings

### Hallucinations

This is when your senses might play tricks on you, making you hear, see, or feel things that aren't really there. For example, you could hear someone speaking when no one else does or see shapes that no one else sees.

### Delusions

These are intense beliefs that feel incredibly real but aren't supported by facts. You might feel convinced you have special talents or believe that people on TV are communicating directly with you.

### Trouble with thinking

You might find it difficult to focus, remember things, or solve problems. This could mean forgetting the name of someone you know well, being confused about how to get somewhere, or missing appointments you usually remember.

'I was in a psychosis, and I thought that I was being possessed by the devil. I also believed that I was in my own version of The Truman Show.'

Listen to a group of people about their experience living with schizophrenia and the stigma they feel people with psychosis face.

### Emotional turmoil

### Fear and paranoia

There might be times when you feel overly scared or anxious without a clear reason. You may think people are against you or trying to harm you, even when they aren't. For example, stepping outside might make you anxious because you're convinced someone is tracking you. Or, you might feel your coworkers are scheming against you when they're simply chatting.

### Confusion and disorentation

Situations or places that you usually find familiar might suddenly seem confusing. You could feel lost while walking in your own neighbourhood. Or, you may struggle knowing what day it is or what you need to do, even if you usually keep a calendar.

'I was on top of a building, ready to jump because I thought I was a bird. Nothing in that moment could have convinced me that I couldn't fly. I believed anything was possible.'

Gracie

### Mood disturbances

### Depression

Living with psychosis can sometimes make you feel down . You may find it hard to find pleasure in things that once made you happy. It's understandable if you're feeling a bit trapped or hopeless, especially after a recent episode.

### Anxiety

The unpredictability of psychosis can stir up a lot of worry about the future. You might find yourself constantly on edge, fretting over when another episode might happen and if you'll be able to cope. This constant worry can make it hard to unwind and be in the moment.

### Irritability

Living with psychosis can make you feel more easily annoyed or frustrated. This could be a reaction to the unsettling symptoms you're facing, like hallucinations or delusions. It's normal to feel on edge when you're navigating these complicated experiences.

Remember, you deserve support and understanding. There are coping strategies that can help you manage your symptoms and triggers . You're not alone, and with the right tools, you can navigate your experiences more easily.

### Physical effects

Living with psychosis isn't just an emotional journey; it can be physically taxing, too. Below, we've highlighted some of the common physical effects you might experience:

### Sleep disruptions

Living with psychosis can sometimes affect your sleep patterns. It might be challenging to drift off or stay asleep, while on other days, you could feel an overwhelming need to rest.

### Appetite and weight changes

Experiencing psychosis might sometimes influence your appetite and weight. You could find yourself eating differently, either more or less. This can result in weight changes, so it's good to be mindful and take steps to manage them.

### Body movement issues

During psychosis, you may notice changes in your body's movements. You might feel a constant urge to move, or you may feel slowed down. Remember, these changes are common, and it's okay to seek support if you feel overwhelmed by them.

### Impact on energy levels

Living with psychosis can mean facing varied energy levels. You might experience days of feeling completely drained, followed by moments of unexpected energy.

### Social effects

If you’re living with psychosis, social situations may feel challenging and your relationships with other people might be impacted. Here are some common social effects you may experience:

### Social withdrawal

You might find yourself pulling away from social situations. Fear or embarrassment about your psychosis might lead you to step back from friends or gatherings. It's helpful to be aware of this so you can find ways to stay connected when you're ready.

### Strained relationships

Having psychosis can affect how you connect with loved ones. You might experience misunderstandings with family or see shifts in friendships. It's tough when relationships feel different or distant, but being aware of these changes can help guide the journey back to connection and understanding.

### Stigma and misunderstanding

Living with psychosis in a society that may lack understanding can feel isolating. Unfair judgements can creep in, and you might doubt that you have what it takes to manage your situation. You may even have suicidal thoughts . It's important to remember that other people’s wrong beliefs and misconceptions may not reflect your own experience. By gaining awareness, you can help yourself and guide others towards compassion and understanding.

### Other effects

Living with psychosis isn't just about managing physical and social challenges. There are other shifts that might impact your life. Below, we explore what these could mean for you.

### Impact on independence and daily functioning

If you're experiencing psychosis, everyday activities and tasks might seem harder than usual. You might find it challenging to think clearly or work productively. Even basic things like making food or brushing your teeth, might feel like a challenge.

### Financial implications

Living with psychosis can sometimes make managing work and money more challenging. Staying employed might feel tough, and unexpected medical costs can add to financial pressures . It’s okay to seek support during these times.

### Coping mechanisms

When you're navigating life with psychosis, you'll come across various coping methods. While activities like exercise or reaching out for support can be uplifting, other choices, like using substances , may offer temporary comfort but can be harmful over time. Here you can find some short-term strategies to help you cope in a safe way.

Click here to download, save, or print our psychosis fact sheet .

## Types

### What are different types of psychosis?

Psychosis is a complex mental health issue that comes in different forms. The most common and well-known type of psychosis is schizophrenia.

If you experience schizophrenia, you may find it hard to think clearly, understand what's real, manage your emotions, and behave in a typical way.

You might see or hear things that aren't there, have strange beliefs, and find it challenging to express your feelings in a regular way.

Schizoaffective disorder, Schizophreniform disorder, Delusional disorder and Schizotypal personality disorder are mental health conditions very similar to schizophrenia, but the symptoms of each can vary in terms of how intense they are and how long they last.

Not all experiences of psychosis fall within these categories. There are a number of other ways that people experience psychosis. These include:

- Sudden and intense psychotic symptoms lasting typically less than one month. This is often referred to as brief psychotic disorder.

- A temporary psychotic episode triggered by the use or withdrawal of drugs or substances . This is often referred to as substance-induced psychosis.

- A type of psychosis triggered by severe emotional or psychological trauma . This is often referred to as trauma-induced psychosis.

- A condition in which some people with severe depression experience psychotic symptoms. This is often referred to as depressive psychosis.

- Psychosis occurring in some people with bipolar disorder during the manic or depressive phases. This is often referred to as bipolar psychosis.

- Psychosis due to changes in the brain. This can be caused by injuries, tumours, infections, or certain brain conditions.

- Psychosis from hormonal changes in the body, such as during pregnancy, after childbirth, or during menopause.

Watch this video about psychosis and its relationship with substance misuse.

Just as every person is unique, so is their experience with psychosis. While we've discussed some common types, not everyone's experience will match these categories. Psychosis is an interplay of many factors, often outside your control. It’s not your fault. There’s no reason to feel guilty or ashamed.

It’s important to understand the correct diagnosis for your experience so you can access the help you need and deserve. We have some information here , which can help you take the first steps in talking to your GP about your experience.

## Causes

### What might be causing psychosis?

Understanding psychosis isn't always straightforward. It can result from a combination of things like genetics, environment, and life experiences. These factors will vary from person to person, but here are some things we know about the role the brain plays in psychosis:

- Chemicals called neurotransmitters help your brain cells talk to one another. When you experience psychosis, the communication between these cells can get mixed up, impacting your thoughts and beliefs.

- Your brain has specific parts that help you make sense of the world around you. When you experience psychosis, these parts change, affecting how you see and understand things around you.

If you are experiencing psychosis, remember it's not your fault or something that you have chosen. Psychosis is just one aspect of you, not your entire identity.

By learning more about the causes of psychosis, we can reduce stigma and create more understanding and kindness for you and everyone affected.

You can find some of the most common causes for psychosis listed below:

### Genetic predisposition

The highest risk factor for psychosis is having a family history. Some family genes can make you more likely to experience changes in your brain. While this genetic link can increase your chance of developing psychosis, it does not necessarily mean that you will.

Life events matter, too. For example, if you have these sensitive genes and you've been through a lot of stress or tough times, this combination could increase your risk. But remember, it’s often not just one single factor that can result in psychosis.

### Hormonal influences

Hormonal changes, like those experienced during puberty, pregnancy, or menopause, can also influence your brain. While these changes may increase your chances of experiencing psychosis, it doesn’t mean that you will go on to develop it.

### Environmental factors

Difficult or traumatic events in childhood can impact your mental health long term. If you experienced very stressful situations as a child, it might increase your chances of developing psychosis later on.

Using drugs or alcohol, especially at a young age when your brain is still developing, can be harmful. Substance misuse can change the way the brain works, possibly leading to psychosis.

The world around us can sometimes be very stressful. Things such as relationship conflicts or financial problems can cause stress , which can affect how our brain works. Over time, this impact might increase the risk of developing psychosis.

Illness, infection, problems with our immune system, and head injuries can also impact the brain. This can lead to a higher risk of psychosis.

### Psychosocial factors

When we feel disconnected or isolated from others, it can leave us feeling lonely. Loneliness can lead to stress and sadness. Over time, this emotional distress can increase the risk of developing psychosis.

The people around you can sometimes influence how your symptoms show up. Their behaviour and reactions can positively or negatively impact your experience.

What those around you believe and expect about mental health can also vary. For example, in some cultures, hearing voices as part of spiritual or religious practices is considered normal. In other cultures, it is seen as unusual. This can affect how you seek and receive help for psychosis.

I experienced my first psychosis episode after giving birth to my second child.

### Triggers

Being aware of what triggers your episodes of psychosis can help you understand them. By understanding and identifying triggers, you can take steps to avoid or manage them. This can help reduce or prevent the intensity of the symptoms you experience.

It can be hard and exhausting to be constantly thinking about your triggers and managing your experience of psychosis. Over time, many people say that managing psychosis does become easier. Remember, Lifeline is always here to support you if times get tough, and there are a range of other services and people available to help you.

We have listed some of the most commonly reported triggers below:

- Lack of sleep can lead to increased hallucinations, strange beliefs, and problems with thinking clearly. Click here to learn more about sleep and mental health .

- Significant life changes or traumatic situations can worsen hallucinations, suspicion, and chaotic thoughts. Some medications prescribed for other conditions may worsen psychotic symptoms.

- Using drugs or alcohol can have a big impact on psychosis symptoms. Particular drugs like cannabis, amphetamines, and hallucinogens can increase risk of psychosis symptoms.

- Things in your environment, such as loud noises or crowded places, can overwhelm you. This may result in increased symptoms of psychosis.

- Being alone or not having supportive people around can make psychotic symptoms worse. Feeling connected and having a supportive network can help manage these symptoms.

- Not taking prescribed medication as directed can make your symptoms of psychosis worse

- If your daily routine gets disrupted, it can make things unstable for you and may result in increased symptoms

- Hormone changes, like during periods or pregnancy, can affect symptoms of psychosis in some people

- Not engaging in your treatment plan can make it harder to manage symptoms.

Techniques & Guides

### How to make a trigger management plan

A trigger management plan is a simple tool to help you recognise emotional triggers and feel more prepared with ways to cope and care for yourself.

4 minutes read

Helps with Emotional wellbeing

## Myths & misconceptions

### Correcting our understanding of psychosis

Psychosis is one of the most misunderstood mental health topics, and sadly, myths and misconceptions about the condition are common. If you’re living with psychosis, these myths may:

- Make it hard to talk about what’s happening for you with other people

- Make it harder to reach out for help and support when you need it

- Mean you’re not treated with the care, respect and understanding you deserve.

Below you can find some of the most common myths, stigmas and misconceptions.

### Misconceptions about people who experience psychosis

### People with psychosis are inherently violent and dangerous

It's a common misconception that people with psychosis are inherently violent or dangerous. Most are no more violent than anyone else. In reality, they're more likely to be victims of violence than perpetrators.

### People with psychosis have a lack of willpower to control their ‘urges’

Believing that people with psychosis simply lack willpower is wrong. Psychosis is a complex mental health challenge and isn't about an inability to control 'urges' any more than someone living with epilepsy can control experiencing a seizure. People who live with psychosis deserve compassion and support, not judgement.

### People with psychosis are hopeless and unable to contribute

The belief that people with psychosis can't contribute or have no hope is misguided. Those living with psychosis have a wealth of potential and capabilities. They can, and often do, lead fulfilling lives, making meaningful contributions to their communities and loved ones.

### People experiencing psychosis are unaware of their condition

While there can be times during intense psychotic episodes when insight is affected, many people with psychosis have a clear understanding of their condition and the challenges it presents.

Watch Hannah's story about her experience with psychosis and how misconceptions impacted her.

### Misconceptions about the nature of psychosis

### Psychosis is an uncommon disorder

It might be surprising for some to learn that psychosis isn't as rare as commonly believed. Around 1 in every 200 adults in Australia will experience a psychotic illness each year. It's important we remain informed and compassionate rather than seeing psychosis as unusual.

### You can ‘snap someone out’ of psychosis

The belief that you can simply 'snap someone out' of psychosis is mistaken. Like other health challenges, it needs understanding and often professional care. Quick fixes or telling someone to 'snap out of it' won't help.

### All psychotic episodes are the same

Believing that all psychotic episodes are the same oversimplifies a complex condition. Just as each person is unique, so are their experiences with psychosis. It's important to approach each person's experience with understanding and compassion.

### Drug use alone causes psychosis

It's a misconception that drug use is the sole cause of psychosis. Using drugs can make symptoms appear sooner in some people, but it's unlikely to cause psychosis in someone who wouldn't have had it otherwise. Although drugs can trigger episodes of psychosis, there are often many other factors at play. Understanding the broader picture is important, rather than placing blame solely on substance use .

### Misconceptions about recovery and treatment

### Psychosis is a permanent condition

Contrary to what some might think, psychosis isn't necessarily a life-long condition. Many people recover fully, while others manage their symptoms effectively with the right support.

'People think if someone is unwell at one point, they can never get better, but they can.'

### Medication cures psychosis completely

Medication can be helpful in treating psychosis, but it's not a one-size-fits-all cure. A holistic approach often works best, involving a combination of therapeutic treatments, understanding, support, and self-help strategies.

### Relapses are always preventable

While proactive measures and treatments can be effective, not all relapses are preventable. Relapses can occur for various reasons. Sometimes, they are just part of the journey. What's important is the continuous support and understanding from loved ones, professionals, and the community.

## Short-term help

### Practical things you can do in the moment to feel better

Understanding and managing psychosis can feel overwhelming. But, with the right tools, it can become a bit more manageable. During an episode, it might be tough to search for answers. By having pre-prepared strategies you can turn to at times of need, you can navigate through these times with a bit more ease and confidence.

Experiences of psychosis can vary, so we have organised these short-term strategies based on what they can help with:

### Coping with paranoia

If you’re experiencing paranoia, it's useful to pause and check whether there’s any truth to your beliefs. Seeking input from a trusted friend or family member can be really valuable.

They can ask you questions like:

- "Is there solid proof for this thought?"

- "Could there be another way to see this?"

It's just as important to find ways to cope with paranoia when you don’t have friends or family around you.

Here are some more strategies to help you confront unsettling thoughts and gain a clearer perspective:

- Remind yourself that TV or other media cannot communicate with you personally. These are pre-recorded and scripted programs, not messages directed at you.

- Write down your paranoid thoughts. Putting them on paper can help you examine them more objectively. Later, when you're in a calmer state of mind, you can revisit what you’ve written to gain insights.

- Engage in an activity you enjoy, or that requires your full attention, like reading a book, doing a puzzle, or listening to calming music. This can help shift your focus away from paranoid thoughts.

- Create a safe and comfortable environment for yourself. Sometimes, changing your physical surroundings can reduce feelings of paranoia.

- Turn to a distraction or grounding technique like below.

### Distraction techniques

When paranoia feels overwhelming, distraction techniques can be helpful. They can take your focus away from distressing thoughts and feelings, providing relief from the intensity of paranoia. Engaging in enjoyable or calming activities can also help reduce anxiety and tension, making it easier to manage paranoia.

By choosing a distraction, you take an active step in regaining control over your thoughts and emotions.

Here are some ideas for how to distract yourself when feeling overwhelmed by paranoia:

- Spend time doing self-care activities , whether it's drawing, playing an instrument, writing, or any other hobby that you enjoy

- Go for a walk, do a workout, or engage in light exercise. Physical activity can release endorphins and help reduce anxiety

- Try mindfulness or meditation exercises to stay grounded in the present moment and ease anxious thoughts

- Listen to music that helps you relax and takes your mind off distressing thoughts

- Choose a light-hearted movie or TV show to watch. Remember that it's just entertainment and not a reflection of your reality

- Solve puzzles or engage in brain teasers to shift your focus and challenge your mind in a positive way

- Do a grounding technique like deep breathing to calm your nervous system. Watch the video below to try it now.

After engaging in a distraction activity, it's possible that the distressing thoughts may come back. If this happens, acknowledge the thoughts without judging yourself. Remind yourself that they are just thoughts and they don’t necessarily reflect reality.

Consider talking to a trusted friend , family member, or mental health professional about your experience and feelings. If the thoughts become overwhelming or unmanageable, remember you can always reach out for support .

### Dealing with hallucinations

When you experience psychosis, it can leave you with feelings of confusion and unease, especially when dealing with hallucinations. Seeing, hearing, or feeling things that others cannot can be unsettling and even frightening.

Below, you'll find ideas for how to deal with them.

### Use reality anchors

Experiencing hallucinations can be disorienting, but there are techniques you can use to anchor yourself in reality.

Using a grounding technique like "reality anchors" can help you distinguish between what's real and what's a hallucination. Here are some effective reality anchor strategies:

- Repeat reassuring statements to yourself, such as "I am safe," "This will pass," or "I can handle this." These can provide comfort and maintain your connection to reality

- Engage your senses to connect with the real world. Touch something textured or hold a familiar object. Describe the sensations to yourself to reinforce your awareness of the present moment.

- Practice mindfulness techniques to stay rooted in the here and now. This can help you maintain a clear and present awareness.

- Ask yourself questions about your surroundings or the situation. For example, ask about the time, date, or location. Confirm these details with a trusted person or a reliable source if you can.

- Have a designated "safety buddy" or support person you can contact during hallucinations. Talking to someone you trust can provide a reality check and emotional support.

- Imagine a protective shield or barrier surrounding you. Visualise this shield as a source of safety and comfort that separates you from the hallucinations.

- Set alarms to go off throughout the day and use these times to consciously check in with your surroundings and confirm their reality.

### Engaging in safe diversions

When you're experiencing hallucinations, finding safe diversions can be a helpful way to manage them. Diversions are activities that can redirect your attention away from the hallucinations and towards something more calming and enjoyable. Here are some examples of safe diversions you can try:

- Put on your favourite music or calming tunes. Listen to songs that make you feel relaxed and at ease.

- Practise deep breathing exercises to help ground yourself in the present moment. Inhale slowly for a count of four, hold your breath for a count of four, and then exhale slowly for a count of four. Repeat as needed.

- Close your eyes and imagine a peaceful place, like a serene beach or a tranquil forest. Picture yourself there, paying attention to the sights, sounds, and sensations.

- Write down your thoughts and feelings in a journal . This can help you process what you're experiencing and provide a sense of control over your emotions.

- Reach out to a trusted friend or family member for support. Sometimes, a comforting conversation can provide relief.

### Dealing with disorganised thoughts

Dealing with disorganised thoughts can be challenging, but there are practical steps you can take to regain clarity and focus. By implementing these strategies, you can better manage disorganised thoughts and navigate through challenging moments. When your thoughts make communicating hard, it’s okay to ask others to help clarify or guide you. You don’t have to do it alone.

Here’s how you can manage disorganised thoughts:

- Keeping a journal can be a powerful tool. Write down your thoughts as they come to you, even if they seem jumbled or confusing. Don't worry about grammar or structure; the goal is to get your thoughts out of your head and onto paper. This process can help you identify patterns and triggers for your disorganised thoughts.

- When tasks or responsibilities seem overwhelming due to disorganised thoughts, break them down into smaller, manageable steps. Create a to-do list that outlines each component of the task. This approach makes complex tasks feel more achievable and less daunting.

- When your disorganised thoughts affect your ability to communicate clearly, don't hesitate to ask for help. Reach out to friends, family, or colleagues and let them know you may need assistance understanding or organising your thoughts. People you trust can provide guidance, rephrase questions, or offer support.

If your disorganised thoughts persist and significantly impact your daily life, consider reaching out for support from a mental health professional. They can provide strategies and therapies tailored to your specific needs.

### Managing anxiety

Many people who experience psychosis also experience anxiety . This is understandable given that the thoughts and experiences that come with psychosis can be distressing and unsettling. Experiencing anxiety can further intensify the challenges you face with psychosis.

You don’t have to try and manage your anxiety symptoms on your own. We have resources for managing anxiety here .

### Finding relief through grounding techniques

When feeling overwhelmed, grounding techniques can be a practical yet powerful way to feel calm and regain control. Learn how they can help you.

11 minutes read

Helps with Anxiety Stress

If you’re feeling distressed, overwhelmed, or uncertain about reality, remember that there’s help available. You can contact Lifeline 24 hours a day. You can also consult your crisis plan or contact your treatment team if you have one. If you or someone else is in danger, please reach out to emergency services on 000 .

### Things to keep in mind right now

- Remaining connected to supportive people is important when you’re feeling distressed or experiencing symptoms of psychosis

- If you know you’re about to step into a situation where triggers are present, if possible, avoid them to prevent symptoms from getting worse

- If you are working closely with a treatment team, be sure to lean on them for support.

## Long-term help

### Explore long-term strategies to manage psychosis

Navigating psychosis can be challenging, but you’re not alone in your journey. Remember that you have the power to actively shape your long-term care and overall wellbeing in a way that works for you. Experiencing psychosis can be scary and alienating, but many people report that over time, they learn what strategies work for them, and develop confidence with managing their symptoms.

Below you can find some strategies that can help you manage your psychosis long term.

### Understanding the nature of psychosis

Psychosis is often a long-term journey, but that doesn’t mean it will dictate your life. Understanding that it’s possible to lead a fulfilling life with psychosis is the first step to taking control. Even though it may sometimes feel overwhelming, you have the ability to manage your psychosis with the right tools. It's all about knowing your triggers and planning for them. This way, when symptoms show up, you're prepared.

For example, you could write a crisis plan and have a screenshot of it in your phone so if triggers and symptoms arise, you have easy access to an immediate tool.

### Having a crisis plan

A crisis plan is like a roadmap for managing difficult moments in your psychosis journey. It's a pre-prepared strategy that outlines what to do when symptoms become overwhelming or when you feel you're in crisis.

A crisis plan could include:

- A list of the specific triggers and warning signs that may suggest a crisis is coming

- A list of coping techniques that have been effective in the past or may help during times of distress (e.g. removing yourself from an over-stimulating environment)

- A list of names and phone numbers of trusted individuals who can provide support during a crisis. This may involve family members, friends, therapists, or crisis helplines like Lifeline .

- A list of the names and dosages of any medications you are taking, along with instructions for use.

### Building a supportive treatment team

Building a supportive treatment team is an important step in your journey. By teaming up with mental health experts, you can come up with a detailed plan that suits your personal needs. Open communication, trust, and making decisions together with your team are key to achieving the best results for your wellbeing. With the right care, you can manage your psychosis successfully.

Here are some practical tips on how you can get the most out of working with your team:

- Collaborate with therapists to choose the most suitable options for your needs

- Work with your treatment team to identify warning signs and triggers

- Openly discuss concerns and side effects if medication is part of your treatment plan

- Share your treatment goals with your support network

- Involve yourself in decision-making when and where it’s possible to do so.

If you don’t currently have a treatment team, here is some guidance on how you can begin to build your own team and interact with them:

- Begin by seeing your regular doctor. They can guide you and refer you to specialists if needed. If you don’t have a regular doctor, you can find one here.

- Find a mental health specialist who specialises in psychosis. They can provide valuable insights and support.

- Look into local groups or organisations that can assist you. They often have supportive individuals who understand your situation.

- Don't hesitate to involve your family, as they can offer important support and help with your care

- Ensure your treatment team includes various specialists like psychologists, psychiatrists and medication experts to cover different aspects of your care.

- Work closely with your treatment team to create a care plan that's tailored to your specific needs and goals

- Schedule regular appointments with your treatment team to monitor your progress and make any necessary adjustments to your plan.

Building your treatment team might take some effort, but it's an important step in managing your psychosis. With the right support and guidance, you can work towards feeling better and regaining control over your life.

'I can manage my psychosis way better now than I used to because I understand what it is and why it's happening.'

Hannah

### Symptom management and coping strategies

### Developing resilience

Resilience is having an inner strength that helps you get through tough times. Building this resilience is about learning to navigate challenges more smoothly. Unfortunately, it’s realistic that you will face challenges, and some of them may be really significant. But if you can focus on learning better ways to manage, and what works for you through each challenge, over time, you’ll find they’re easier to sail through.

By focusing on solutions, and breaking tasks into achievable steps, you can feel more in control.

For example, if managing your medication becomes a challenge for you, try breaking the problem down:

- Draft a medication timetable

- Set daily reminders on your phone

- Organise your doses with pillboxes.

Tackling issues step by step can give you a sense of control and confidence. Remember, every step forward, no matter how small, is progress on your journey.

### Identifying triggers and warning signs

Understanding your triggers is important. When you and your loved ones can identify signs of an oncoming episode, you can take action to prevent or minimise its impact. You can think of triggers as early warning signs or little alarms going off.

Knowing your triggers can also help you take steps to avoid or minimise your exposure to the things that make your symptoms worse. By recognising what might lead to an episode, you can take steps to prevent it from occurring in the first place.

Things like not sleeping well, or feeling a bit more on edge, could be clues that your symptoms might get worse. If you notice these warning signs , it might be a good time to try some calming exercises or reach out to your support team.

Keeping a list or a journal of your personal triggers can be a powerful tool. It can help you become more aware of what specific situations, thoughts, or feelings tend to trigger or worsen your symptoms. Once you identify your triggers, you can take proactive steps to prevent or minimise exposure to them.

Over time, tracking your triggers and how you respond to them can help you see how you’re progressing through your psychosis journey. It's a good way to see how your efforts are paying off and the progress you’re making.

### Adopting Cognitive Behavioural techniques

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy , often called CBT, is an effective treatment strategy for psychosis. In CBT, you learn that your thoughts lead to your feelings, which then guide your actions. It's like a loop where your thoughts affect how you feel and what you do.

By using CBT, you can get better at spotting negative thoughts and swapping them for more balanced ones. For example, if you sometimes feel like others are whispering about you, CBT can help you step back, think of other reasons they might be chatting, or check if that thought holds true.

If CBT sounds like something you'd like to dive into, think about teaming up with a psychologist . They can guide you through it, helping you build up those coping skills for when things get tough.

### Strategies for overall wellbeing

### Setting realistic goals

Achieving goals is like planting little flags on your psychosis journey, to show you’re making progress. The trick is to keep these goals achievable. Start with small steps, like making your bed daily or remembering to take your medication. And when you tick something off, even if it’s the smallest step, celebrate it like it’s a big win. Because it is!

Every win, no matter how tiny, is a step forward. Remember, there might be days when symptoms feel more challenging. If you're feeling drained or things change, reshape your goals to fit where you're at. It’s your journey, and you get to decide the pace.

### Structuring daily routine

A structured daily routine is important. By having set times for waking, medication, meals, therapy, and even downtime, you can feel a sense of stability. Knowing what to expect each day can reduce your feelings of uncertainty and anxiety, which are both common triggers for symptoms of psychosis.

Try and prioritise your sleep. Good sleep isn't just refreshing, it's important for managing your symptoms. Stick to a consistent sleep schedule, and have a bedtime routine. It’s also a good idea to avoid screen time just before bed.

Your daily routine should include social interaction and seeking support from friends, family, or support groups. Social connections will help you maintain relationships and feel a sense of belonging.

Pay attention to what your body and mind tell you. This way, you can give yourself the best possible care. This means finding the right balance of action and relaxation. It's great to do things you love, but knowing when to take a break is just as important.

### Self-care and wellness practices

Not only do you deserve to set aside time for your own wellbeing, but doing so can make a big difference in how your symptoms show up. By taking care of your body with regular exercise, good meals, and proper sleep, you’re also giving your mind the best chance to stay on track.

It’s also important to have practices that can help you manage stress. Stress is a common part of life, but it doesn’t have to control you. There are ways you can manage it. Mindfulness can help bring you back to the present moment. Or, if that’s not something you’re into, relaxation exercises or jotting down your feelings in a journal can also help.

When considering other ways to express your emotions, try and find creative ways that work for you. This could be through things like music, art, or photography. If you’re looking for a simple idea, consider creating a self-care box filled with things that make you feel good. It's a small step, but sometimes, small steps make the biggest difference.

### Connection and social support

Feeling connected to others is something we all need. When you surround yourself with understanding friends, family, or peer groups, it can help to ease the weight on your shoulders. Even simple day-to-day chats can make a world of difference, like asking someone about their day, or sharing a laugh over a hobby.

If finding the right words feels challenging, remember there are many different ways to communicate and connect. You can write a letter, send a text, connect with someone on an online video game, or dive into an online forum with others who've been in your shoes.

And if you ever feel that these connections aren’t enough, remember there are professionals waiting to help . Reaching out to a professional isn't about admitting you can't cope – it's about embracing every tool and support available to you and learning some new skills from those with experience. And on especially tough days, Lifeline is always here to listen.

### Mindful use of technology and media

Navigating life with psychosis means paying special attention to how you use technology and media. What you feed your mind matters. When researching your condition, stick to trusted sources. Avoid sensationalised content that might make you anxious. Look at trusted websites, mental health organisations, or your healthcare provider for accurate information.

Social media can be both helpful and challenging. It's okay to set boundaries. Unfollow or mute accounts that trigger negative feelings, and spend more time with online communities that offer support. If it becomes overwhelming, consider taking breaks. You could even consider a digital detox .

Be aware of the movies and TV shows you watch, or the games you play. Some themes can be distressing. Try and choose content that is going to be best for your mental health, and avoid anything that might trigger or worsen your symptoms.

Technology can also be a tool for self-care. There are apps designed to help manage stress and anxiety , which can be valuable during tough moments related to your psychosis. You can check out our Tools and Apps page here . You can also seek out online support groups or forums for people with psychosis. These communities understand your experiences and can offer understanding, support and encouragement.

### Embracing a holistic approach

### Managing multiple conditions

Facing mental health challenges can be tough, especially if you're dealing with more than one at a time. It's not uncommon to experience psychosis alongside other issues like depression , anxiety , or substance misuse . It's important to address everything you're feeling, even if it’s not necessarily related to psychosis.

A detailed check-up can help figure out your needs. While some treatments may suit psychosis, others might be necessary to help with different challenges. Taking care of all aspects of your wellbeing is important and seeking help is just another step towards feeling better.

### Self-advocacy in treatment

Your journey is a personal one and it's okay for your path to shift and change. As you navigate through, remember to check in with yourself. How does your current treatment feel? Do you feel like your needs are being met?

It's more than okay to discuss and adapt things with your care team. Remember, it’s all about what feels right for you. Having the courage and confidence to say what you need is one of the most important elements of staying on the best path to feeling better.

Living with psychosis can be challenging, but it's important to remember that you're not alone in this journey. There are people who care about you and support services available to help you. While there's no quick fix, there's hope. With the right support and care, you can learn to manage the symptoms of psychosis and live a fulfilling life.

## Tools & apps

### Tools and apps to manage psychosis

Below is a curated list of some tools and apps you can use to help manage psychosis.

Tools & Apps

### Smiling Mind

Smiling Mind is a mindfulness and meditation app that helps kids, teens, and adults improve their wellbeing and achieve specific mental health goals like better sleep, reduced stress, stronger relationships, and more.

Helps with Anxiety Depression

### Calm

Calm is a mindfulness, meditation, and music app that offers guided tracks, sleep stories, and other techniques that can help you improve your wellbeing, boost your mood, manage stress and anxiety, get better sleep, and more.

Helps with Stress Anxiety

### Black Dog Institute's Online Clinic

The Online Clinic offers free clinical assessments for common mental health conditions and provides personalised reports of suggested support services and resources.

Helps with Mental Health Assessment

## Support services

### Connect with support services for managing psychosis

Below are support services you can connect with to get help with managing psychosis.

Support Service

### SANE

SANE is a national mental health organisation for people with complex mental health issues and the families, friends and carers that support them.

Helps with Counselling Mental Health

### Lifeline Crisis Support

Lifeline is a free and confidential one-to-one support service for anyone feeling overwhelmed, distressed or having difficulty staying safe.

Helps with Suicidality Safety Planning

### FriendLine

FriendLine is a free and anonymous national phone and chat service for anyone 18+ who’s feeling lonely, socially isolated, or just wants to connect with a friendly volunteer.

Helps with Loneliness Connection

### Early psychosis program

headspace provides Early Psychosis program for young people who are experiencing an early episode of psychosis or are at risk of developing psychosis.

The program provides a specialist clinical case manager who develops an individual treatment plan and provides support throughout the treatment. They also provide peer support and family workers who work with young people and their families to achieve their goals.

To learn more about the program, click on the link below:

### headspace

headspace provides mental health and wellbeing support for Australians ages 12-25 as well as for their family and friends.

Helps with Mental Health Wellbeing

### Search for more services

Use the Lifeline Service Finder to search for more local and national services available to help support you.

### Lifeline Service Finder

Lifeline's Service Finder is an online directory of free or low-cost health and community services in Australia. Search for GPs, counsellors, material support and much more.

Helps with Finding support

## For friends & family

### Understanding psychosis and how you can help

Supporting a loved one with psychosis can be emotionally and mentally challenging.

It's okay to feel a mix of worry, concern, uncertainty, or even frustration. You may feel anxious about what lies ahead, or there may be moments when you feel guilty for feeling overwhelmed.

These emotions are natural and understandable. They're not a sign of weakness but a testament to the depth of your care and concern. Gaining knowledge and understanding about psychosis can be helpful. This can allow you to connect with your loved ones' experiences and provide guidance on how to help them.

### The impact of supporting a loved one with psychosis

If you’re supporting someone with psychosis, you may find yourself navigating their unexpected behaviours. You may also struggle with their perceptions of reality being different to your own. You aren’t alone - many people who care for someone with psychosis report these feelings. It may also feel like you have no time to look after yourself, but remember - your wellbeing matters, too.

### Emotional impact

Feelings of confusion and helplessness

Supporting a loved one with psychosis can be overwhelming. You may struggle to understand the complexities of the condition and its symptoms. You may feel confused about how to provide the best support and care.

Fear and anxiety for loved one’s safety

Witnessing your loved one experience an episode of psychosis can make you feel worried and anxious for their safety and wellbeing.

It's natural to have fears about potential harm or self-destructive behaviours during these times. It’s important to remember that those who experience psychosis generally stay safe. The earliest times can be the scariest, but as your loved one learns coping strategies over time, they'll gain more confidence and control over their wellbeing.

Grief over changes in the relationship and future expectations

When a loved one is diagnosed with psychosis, it’s natural to experience grief about a future that’s different from what you imagined. Psychosis can change how a relationship feels and it's normal for you to miss the bond you shared.

### Impact on relationships

Family dynamics and roles

When a loved one faces psychosis, you might notice changes in the roles and dynamics of your family. As you all adapt, it's natural for relationships and responsibilities to change and evolve.

Romantic relationships and communication challenges

Psychosis can create communication barriers between you and your partner. This can potentially add stress to your relationship. Finding ways to understand and be patient with each other is important to maintain connection.

Impact on children and young family members

Psychosis in the family can make children and young people feel unsettled or anxious. Offering them guidance and reassurance is important to help them navigate these feelings.

Navigating the journey of a loved one experiencing psychosis can be isolating and overwhelming. Your feelings are valid, and remember, there is support available.

### Practical challenges

Navigating the healthcare system

You may find part of your caring role is navigating the healthcare system. This means knowing which services you can access and understanding Medicare and private health options. Alongside long waitlists, this can be frustrating and overwhelming. You can find out more about how to navigate the healthcare system here .

Balancing caregiving with other commitments

Caring for your loved one while managing your own work and family duties can be tough. It's common to feel stressed and overwhelmed at times. Remember, it's okay for you to prioritise your other commitments. You don't have to put your life on hold for your loved one who is experiencing psychosis, and you shouldn't feel guilty about it. You can continue to support them in meaningful ways while maintaining your own balance.

Financial stress

Caring for someone with psychosis can mean facing added medical expenses, such as medication and therapy. You may also find that you need to adjust your work hours or take unpaid leave. Facing these practical challenges might seem overwhelming. Remember, if you’re experiencing financial stress , there are people and resources available to help you along the way.

Societal stigma surrounding psychosis

Stigma around psychosis can lead to feelings of discrimination and isolation for both you and your loved one. Negative attitudes often prevent open conversations and can stop people from reaching out for help.

It can be helpful for you to understand some of the common myths and stigmas surrounding psychosis, so you can better understand what your loved one experiences, and can ensure you’re armed with the right information.

Impact of stigma

Facing stigma can affect the self-esteem and self-worth of someone with psychosis. This is what often leads them away from seeking the treatment and support they need. For you, as their loved one, judgement from others can result in feelings of shame and guilt. This might make you feel like you should conceal their psychosis and its challenges.

### Practical tips for your role as a supporter

### Effective communication

Maintaining open communication with your loved one is important. Approach conversations with honesty. Discuss feelings, needs, and boundaries while creating a supportive environment. Remember to listen without judgement, always acknowledging and validating their feelings and experiences.

### Supporting treatment collaboration

Working with mental health professionals and playing an active role in your loved one's treatment can be very beneficial. Teamwork and shared decision-making can make a meaningful difference in their path to recovery.

It's important to respect your loved one's preferences regarding their treatment involvement. If they prefer not to have you directly involved, you should respect their choice. As you support them, don't forget to prioritise your mental wellbeing, too.

### Family therapy

Involving family in therapy sessions can be a good way to improve understanding and learn coping mechanisms for all involved. When considering this approach, you can suggest to your loved one, "Would you be open to us attending a therapy session together? It might help us both navigate this journey."

### Celebrating progress and achievements

It’s important to recognise and celebrate even the smallest steps forward. Each positive change, no matter how minor, marks progress in your loved one’s journey. As a support network, it's equally important to pause and appreciate the milestones and achievements you've reached. This can increase morale and keep you uplifted in the hard times.

### Reducing stigma

Stigma can increase the isolation faced by those experiencing psychosis. As a loved one, you can play a powerful role in challenging these misconceptions . Talking openly, providing facts, and sharing your experience, can promote empathy and understanding. By doing this, you're supporting your loved one and promoting a more accepting society.

### Reducing relapse

Being aware of your loved one's triggers and warning signs is important for early intervention. Identifying early signs can help you act quickly to prevent a relapse. You might often become aware of triggers or early warning signs before your loved one does, so it’s important for you to be proactive in avoiding or managing these triggers.

Here are some key steps to reduce the risk of relapse:

- Maintain an open and honest dialogue with your loved one about their condition. Encourage them to share their thoughts and feelings, even if they seem distressing.

- Work together to identify specific triggers or situations that tend to worsen their symptoms. These triggers can be different for each person. Once identified, develop strategies to avoid or manage their personal triggers.

- Learn to recognise the early warning signs of an impending episode. These signs can include changes in behaviour, sleep patterns, mood, or social interactions.

- Develop a crisis plan together, outlining steps to take when warning signs appear

- Encourage your loved one to continue their treatment and attend therapy sessions regularly. Ensure they have access to mental health professionals who can help manage their condition effectively.

- If medication is part of their treatment, help them adhere to the prescribed plan

- Encourage self-care practices like quality sleep, regular exercise, and a healthy diet.

Educate yourself about psychosis and available resources. This knowledge will empower you to provide better support.

### Crisis management

Working together on a crisis plan helps you respond quickly and effectively in emergencies.

A crisis plan is like a roadmap for managing difficult moments in your loved one’s psychosis journey. It's a pre-prepared strategy that outlines what to do when symptoms become overwhelming or when they are in crisis.

- A list of coping techniques that have been effective in the past or may help during times of distress. For example, removing them from an over-stimulating environment.

- A list of the names and dosages of any medications your loved one is taking, along with instructions for use.

In addition to having a crisis plan, there are other short-term and long-term strategies that can help your loved one along their journey.

### Looking after yourself

### The importance of self-care

Supporting a loved one with psychosis is an act of love and support, but can also be very demanding. It's important to take moments for yourself and prioritise self-care . Overlooking your own needs can result in burnout. This can make it challenging to support your loved one effectively. By prioritising your own wellbeing you will be able to support your loved one in meaningful ways.

### Practical ways you can look after yourself

Taking time for yourself is important in your caregiving journey. Everyone will have different ways of caring for themselves, so it’s important to find what works for you. There are a range of different options you can try, such as:

- Mindfulness

- Journaling your thoughts and feelings

- Using grounding techniques

- Surrounding yourself with supportive friends

- Taking part in hobbies you enjoy

- Seeking expert advice

- Creating a self-care box .

### Community support

Supporting a loved one through psychosis can be demanding, but remember, you're not alone. Support groups can provide a safe space for you to share stories, exchange advice, and find comfort among peers. Here you can find some support services that may be helpful. You can also search for other services using our service finder .

#### Was this page helpful?

Your feedback helps us improve our site for people like you.

We’d love to hear why! Tell us more

## Help starts here

Support looks different for everyone. Use the drop down bar to find what feels right for you.

How can we help?

- I'm thinking about suicide

Back to top

Visit Lifeline Australia

- Training

- Volunteer

- Fundraise

- About Lifeline

- Find a Lifeline Centre

- Contact us

Reconciliation Action Plan

Lived Experience Framework

Lifeline pays its respects to the traditional custodians across the lands on which we work, and acknowledge their elders past and present.

Lifeline pays deep respect to people who have personal experiences of crisis and suicide. They are the reason our organisation and services exist.

Lifeline is committed to providing a safe, culturally appropriate, and inclusive service for all people, regardless of their ethnicity, faith, disability, sexuality, or gender identity.

- Policies

- Terms of Use

- Privacy

- Accessibility

- Language

Lifeline is a registered ACNC charity. ABN: 84 081 031 263. RTO Registration Code 88036. Copyright © 2025 Lifeline Australia. All rights reserved.



## Links found on page

- Skip to main content: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#main-content

- Call us ●: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/131114

- Chat with us ●: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/chat

- Text us ●: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/text

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/: https://www.lifeline.org.au/

- I’m thinking about suicide: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/im-thinking-about-suicide

- I want to talk to someone: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/i-want-to-talk-to-someone

- I'm worried about someone: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/im-worried-about-someone

- I want to explore my options: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/i-want-to-explore-my-options

- Get help home: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help

- Call us 13 11 14 ● Service online: https://www.lifeline.org.au/131114

- Chat to us Support 24/7 ● Service online: https://www.lifeline.org.au/chat

- Text us 0477 13 11 14 ● Service online: https://www.lifeline.org.au/text

- Crisis support: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/crisis-support

- Counselling: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/counselling

- Service Finder: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/service-finder

- Workplace & community training: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/workplace-and-community-training

- Services home: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services

- Topics: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics

- Techniques & guides: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides

- Tools & apps: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps

- Safety planning: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/safety-planning

- Community perspectives: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/community-perspectives

- Fact sheets: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/fact-sheets

- Support Toolkit home: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit

- Sleep and mental health: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/sleep-and-mental-health

- Journaling your thoughts and feelings: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/journaling-for-mental-health-how-it-helps-and

- How to do a digital detox: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/how-to-do-a-digital-detox

- Helping friends and family: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/how-to-talk-to-someone-about-their-mental-health

- About Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT): https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/cognitive-behavioural-therapy-cbt

- Forums: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/hear-from-others/discussion-forums

- Real stories: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/hear-from-others/real-stories

- Hear from others home: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/hear-from-others

- Listen to Joe's story: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/hear-from-others/real-stories/joes-story

- Donate: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/donate

- Donate to Lifeline: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/donate/donate-to-lifeline

- Donate in memory: https://inmemory.lifeline.org.au

- Leave a gift in your Will: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/donate/leave-a-gift-in-your-will

- Fundraise: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/fundraising

- Fundraise for Lifeline: https://fundraise.lifeline.org.au/

- Events: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/events

- Volunteer: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/volunteer

- Become a crisis supporter: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/volunteer/volunteer-as-a-crisis-supporter

- Community volunteering: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/volunteer-in-your-community

- Partner with us: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved/partner-with-us

- About us: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us

- Who we are: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/who-we-are

- Our strategy: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/our-strategy

- Our services: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/our-services

- Our impact: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/our-impact

- Our structure: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/our-structure

- Governance: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/governance

- Lived experience framework: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about-us/lived-experience

- Our research: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-research

- Data & statistics: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-research/data-and-statistics

- Research & reports: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-research/research-and-reports

- Our partners: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-partners

- Government supporters: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-partners/government-supporters

- Corporate partners: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/our-partners/our-corporate-partners

- Contact us: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/contact-us

- Lifeline locations: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/find-a-lifeline-centre-near-you

- News & media: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/news-and-media

- Careers: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/careers

- Shop merchandise: https://lifelineaustralia.infoservices.com.au

- Fundraise: https://fundraise.lifeline.org.au

- Urgent Crisis Support: https://www.lifeline.org.au/urgent-crisis-support

- English: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis

- What is psychosis?: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#what-is-psychosis

- Feelings & effects: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#feelings-and-effects-of-psychosis

- Types: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#types-of-psychosis

- Causes: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#causes-of-psychosis

- Myths & misconceptions: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#myths-and-misconceptions

- Short-term help: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#what-you-can-do-right-now-for-psychosis

- Long-term help: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#long-term-help-for-psychosis

- Tools & apps: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#tools-and-apps-for-psychosis

- Support services: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#support-services-for-psychosis

- For friends & family: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/psychosis#for-friends-family-psychosis

- in the moment: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/what-you-can-do-right-now-for-psychosis

- long term: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/long-term-help-for-psychosis

- support services: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/support-services-for-psychosis

- Click here to save or print our psychosis fact sheet: https://www.lifeline.org.au/sites/default/files/2025-11/lifeline-australia-psychosis-fact-sheet_0.pdf

- Click here to save or print 13YARN's psychotic illness fact sheet for mob: https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/61ef8a4fe1c6faaa593e22eb/651f473d134194b356d46539_Psychotic%20Illness%20in%20Mob.pdf

- anxious: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/anxiety/feelings-and-effects-of-anxiety

- feel down: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/depression/feelings-and-effects-of-depression

- triggers: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/causes-of-psychosis

- suicidal thoughts: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/suicide/feelings-and-effects-of-suicide

- misconceptions: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/myths-and-misconceptions

- financial pressures: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/financial-stress/what-is-financial-stress

- seek support: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/financial-stress/support-services-for-financial-stress

- using substances: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/substance-misuse/what-is-substance-misuse

- trauma: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/trauma/about-trauma

- depression: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/depression/what-is-depression

- here: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/mental-health-care-plan-what-it-covers-and-how-to

- stress: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/stress/what-is-stress

- traumatic events: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/trauma

- Substance misuse: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/substance-misuse

- stress: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/stress

- Loneliness: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/loneliness

- Lifeline is always here to support you: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/contacting-lifeline-guide

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/how-to-make-a-trigger-management-plan: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/how-to-make-a-trigger-management-plan

- trusted friend: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/talk-to-someone-you-trust

- unsettling thoughts: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/managing-intrusive-thoughts

- grounding technique: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/finding-relief-through-grounding-techniques

- self-care activities: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/self-care-for-mental-health-and-wellbeing

- anxiety: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/anxiety/what-is-anxiety

- mindfulness: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/getting-started-with-mindfulness

- meditation: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/an-introduction-to-meditation

- here: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/anxiety/what-you-can-do-right-now-anxiety

- symptoms of psychosis: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/feelings-and-effects-of-psychosis

- triggers: https://toolkit.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/causes-of-psychosis#triggers

- warning signs: https://toolkit.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/feelings-and-effects-of-psychosis#early-warning-signs

- teaming up with a psychologist: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/finding-the-right-therapist

- creating a self-care box: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/creating-a-self-care-box

- anxiety: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/anxiety

- here: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/tools-and-apps-for-psychosis

- depression: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/topics/depression

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/smiling-mind: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/smiling-mind

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/calm: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/calm

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/black-dog-institutes-online-clinic: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/tools-and-apps/black-dog-institutes-online-clinic

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/sane: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/sane

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/lifeline-crisis-support: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/lifeline-crisis-support

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/friendline: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/friendline

- Early Psychosis program: https://toolkit.lifeline.org.au/articles/support/headspace#early-psychosis-program

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/headspace: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/headspace

- https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/lifeline-service-finder: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/national-services/lifeline-service-finder

- grief: https://www.lifeline.org.au/topics/grief-loss/what-is-grief

- here: https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/australias-healthcare-system

- self-esteem: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/support-toolkit/techniques-and-guides/self-esteem-and-mental-health

- triggers: https://toolkit.lifeline.org.au/topics/psychotic-illness/causes-of-psychosis#trigges

- Service Finder: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/find-another-service

- Get involved: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-involved

- Reconciliation Action Plan: https://www.lifeline.org.au/about/reconciliation-action-plan

- Policies: https://www.lifeline.org.au/policies

- Privacy: https://www.lifeline.org.au/policies/privacy-policy

- Language: https://www.lifeline.org.au/get-help/services/crisis-support/language-translation-accessibility-support

- https://www.facebook.com/LifelineAustralia/: https://www.facebook.com/LifelineAustralia/

- https://www.instagram.com/lifelineaustralia/: https://www.instagram.com/lifelineaustralia/

- https://au.linkedin.com/company/lifeline-australia: https://au.linkedin.com/company/lifeline-australia

- https://x.com/LifelineAust: https://x.com/LifelineAust

- https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_Rhz-XoVbo02fNrHQZQQHw: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_Rhz-XoVbo02fNrHQZQQHw
